svāyambhuvo manuratho janasargaśīlo
dṛṣṭvā mahīmasamaye salile nimagnām |
sraṣṭāramāpa śaraṇaṃ bhavadaṅghrisevā-
tuṣṭāśayaṃ munijanai: saha satyaloke ||1||
svāyambhuva: manu:	Swaayambhuva Manu
atha: janasargaśīla:	then, who was engaged in creation
dṛṣṭvā mahīm-	seeing the earth,
asamaye salile nimagnām	at a wrong time, being immersed in water
sraṣṭāram-āpa śaraṇaṃ	in the creator, Brahmaa, sought refuge
bhavat-aṅghri-sevā	in the service of Thy lotus feet
tuṣṭa-āśayaṃ	whose heart delighted
munijanai: saha	along with the other sages
satyaloke	in Satyaaloka
Then Swaayambhuva Manu who was engaged in the work of creation, saw the earth emerged in water, untimely (when there was no Pralaya). He went to Satyaloka, in supplication to Brahmaa, the creator, whose heart delighted in the service of Thy lotus feet, along with the other sages.
kaṣṭaṃ prajā: sṛjati mayyavanirnimagnā
sthānaṃ sarojabhava kalpaya tat prajānām |
ityevameṣa kathito manunā svayaṃbhū: -
rambhoruhākṣa tava pādayugaṃ vyacintīt || 2 ||
kaṣṭaṃ	alas!
prajā: sṛjati mayi-	while I am creating beings
avani: -nimagnā	the earth is immersed
sthānaṃ	place
sarojabhava	O Lotus Born! (Brahmaa)
kalpaya tat-prajānām	provide therefore for the beings
iti-evam-eṣa	thus he (Brahmaa)
kathita: manunā svayaṃbhū: -	being told by Manu Swaayambhu
ambhoruhākṣa	O Lotus eyed Lord!
tava pādayugaṃ	Thy two feet
vyacintīt	(he) contemplated on
Swaayambhuva Manu told the lotus born Brahmaa that it was a pity that the earth was submerged as he was creating beings. He asked for a place to be created for the beings. Hearing this Brahmaa started to contemplate on Thy two lotus feet, for a solution to the problem.
hā hā vibho jalamahaṃ nyapibaṃ purastā-
dadyāpi majjati mahī kimahaṃ karomi |
itthaṃ tvadaṅghriyugalaṃ śaraṇaṃ yato'sya
nāsāpuṭāt samabhava: śiśukolarūpī |3||
aṅguṣṭhamātravapurutpatita: purastāt
bhoyo'tha kumbhisadṛśa: samajṛmbhathāstvam |
abhre tathāvidhamudīkṣya bhavantamuccai -
rvismeratāṃ vidhiragāt saha sūnubhi: svai: ||4||
hā hā vibho	Oh! Oh! Lord!
jalam-ahaṃ nyapibaṃ	I drank the waters
purastāt-	previously also
adya-api majjati mahī	(yet) the earth is submerging
kim-ahaṃ karomi	what shall I do
itthaṃ	saying so
tvat-aṅghri-yugalaṃ	at Thy pair of feet
śaraṇaṃ yata: -	who had taken refuge
asya nāsāpuṭāt	from his (Brahmaa's) nostrils
samabhava:	Thou emerged
śiśu-kola-rūpī	in a child boar's form
ko'sāvacintyamahimā kiṭirutthito me
nāsāpuṭāt kimu bhavedajitasya māyā |
itthaṃ vicintayati dhātari śailamātra:
sadyo bhavan kila jagarjitha ghoraghoram ||5||
aṅguṣṭha-mātra-vapu:-	with a body of the size of a thumb
utpatita:	emerged
purastāt	at first
bhūya: -atha	gradually then
kumbhi-sadṛśa:	an elephant in size
samajṛmbhathā: - tvam	did Thou grow
abhre	in the sky
tathā-vidham-udīkṣya	in that form seeing
bhavantam-uccai:	Thou so big
vismeratāṃ vidhi: -agāt	wonder struck Brahmaa was
saha sūnubhi: svai:	with his own sons
At first Thy size was of a thumb, then it gradually grew to the size of an elephant. Brahmaa and his sons were wonder struck seeing Thy huge form in the sky.
taṃ te ninādamupakarṇya janastapa:sthā:
satyasthitāśca munayo nunuvurbhavantam |
tatstotraharṣulamanā: pariṇadya bhūya-
stoyāśayaṃ vipulamūrtiravātarastvam ||6||
ka: -asau-	who is this
acintya-mahimā	of unconceivable glory
kiṭi: -utthita:-	this boar which has emerged
me nāsāpuṭāt	from my nostrils
kimu bhavet-	or is it
ajitasya māyā	the Invincible Lord's Maaya
itthaṃ vicintayati	thus (as Brahmaa was) contemplating
dhātari	Brahmaa,
śailamātra:	the size of a mountain
sadya: bhavan	soon becoming (Thou)
kila jagarjitha	indeed roared
ghoraghoraṃ	in a terrific manner
Brahmaa was wondering as to who the glorious boar was which had come out from his nostrils. As he was trying to reflect if it was the work of the Invincible Lord's Maayaa, Thee in the form of the boar became the size of a mountain and roared fiercely.
ūrdhvaprasāriparidhūmravidhūtaromā
protkṣiptavāladhiravāṅmukhaghoraghoṇa: |
tūrṇapradīrṇajalada: parighūrṇadakṣṇā
stotṛn munīn śiśirayannavateritha tvam ||7||
taṃ te ninādam-	that Thine roar
upakarṇya	hearing
jana:-tapa:-sthā:	the inhabitants of the Jana and Tapa lokas
satya-sthitā: -ca	and those in the Satyaloka
munaya:	sages
nunuvu: -bhavantam	praised Thee
tat-stotra-harṣula-manā:	by their praises pleased
pariṇadya bhūya:	roaring again
toyāśayaṃ	in the ocean
vipula-mūrti: -	assuming a huge form
avātara: -tvam	Thou jumped
Hearing that fierce roar of Thine, the resident sages of the Jana, Tapa and Satya loka praised Thee. Pleased by their praises, Thou assumed a huge form and roaring again jumped into the ocean.
antarjalaṃ tadanusaṃkulanakracakraṃ
bhrāmyattimiṅgilakulaṃ kaluṣormimālam |
āviśya bhīṣaṇaraveṇa rasātalasthā -
nākampayan vasumatīmagaveṣayastvam ||8||
ūrdhva-prasāri-	(with) standing erect
paridhūmra-vidhūta-romā	dark red colored shivering hair
protkṣipta-vāladhi:	lifted up tail
avāṅ-mukha-ghora-ghoṇa:	pointing downwards the fierce snout
tūrṇa-pradīrṇa-jalada:	with ease breaking through the clouds
parighūrṇat-akṣṇā	rolling eyes
stotṛn munīn	the praising sages
śiśirayan-	delighting
avateritha tvam	jumped down Thou
With Thy twitching and erect reddish hair, tail lifted up and the fierce snout pointing down and the eyes rolling, delighting the sages who were praising Thee, Thou easily broke through the clouds and jumped.
dṛṣṭvā'tha daityahatakena rasātalānte
saṃveśitāṃ jhaṭiti kūṭakiṭirvibho tvam |
āpātukānavigaṇayya surārikheṭān
daṃṣṭrāṅkureṇa vasudhāmadadhā: salīlam ||9||
antarjalaṃ	the waters' insides
tadanu-	then
saṃkula-nakra-cakraṃ	with moving about crocodiles
bhrāmyat-timiṅgila-kulaṃ	with whirling around whales
kaluṣa-urmi-mālam	with turbulent waters
āviśya	entering
bhīṣaṇa-raveṇa	with a fierce roar
rasātalasthān-	the inhabitants of the nether worlds
ākampayan	shaking
vasumatīm-	the earth
agaveṣaya: -	searched for
tvam	Thou
Thou entered the insides of the waters where the crocodiles were moving about, whales were whirling around and which was full of turbulent waves. The inhabitants of the nether worlds shook with fear as with a fierce roar Thou searched for the earth.
abhyuddharannatha dharāṃ daśanāgralagna
mustāṅkurāṅkita ivādhikapīvarātmā |
uddhūtaghorasalilājjaladherudañcan
krīḍāvarāhavapurīśvara pāhi rogāt ||10||
dṛṣṭvā-atha	seeing then (the earth)
daitya-hatakena	by the wicked Asura
rasātala-ante	at the bottom of the Rasaatala
saṃveśitāṃ	concealed
jhaṭiti	in no time
kūṭa-kiṭi: -	(Thou who had by Maaya) assumed the form of a boar
vibho tvam	O Lord! Thou,
āpātukān-	the rushing (Asuras)
avigaṇyya	neglecting
surāri-kheṭān	the wretched Asuraas
daṃṣṭra-aṅkureṇa	with the tusk's tip
vasudhām-adadhā:	the earth lifted up
salīlam	as if in sport
O Lord! Then seeing the earth concealed at the bottom of the Rasaatal, by the wretched Asura, Thou hastily lifted it up with the tip of the tusk of the boar, a form which Thou had asummed by Maaya. Treating the Asura with disdain who was rushing at Thee. All this was a mere sport for Thee.
abhyuddharannatha dharāṃ daśanāgralagna
mustāṅkurāṅkita ivādhikapīvarātmā |
uddhūtaghorasalilājjaladherudañcan
krīḍāvarāhavapurīśvara pāhi rogāt ||10||
abhyuddharan-atha	lifting up, then
dharāṃ	the earth
daśana-agra-lagnaṃ	in the tooth front stuck
musta-aṅkura-aṅkita iva	a blade of grass as if
adhika-pīvara-ātmā	with a gigantic body
uddhūta-ghora-salilāt-jaladhe:-	from the fiercely shaken up waters of the ocean,
udañcan	emerging
krīḍā-varāha-vapu: -īśvara	sportingly (taking the form) of a boar body, O Lord!
pāhi rogāt	save me from disease
Thou who had sportingly assumed the body of a boar, lifted the earth from the frightening turbulent waters of the ocean. On Thy gigantic body, the earth looked like a blade of grass stuck on the tip Thy tusk. O Lord! Save me from the disease.